.TH PRG2LOUT 1
.SH NAME
prg2lout - convert computer program text into Lout
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBprg2lout\fR -l \fIlanguage\fR [ \fIoptions\fR ] \fIfiles\fR...
.SH DESCRIPTION
Reformat computer program text for input to the Lout document formatting
system, taking care of comments, character strings, tab characters, etc.
.LP
.B prg2lout
reads the named program source files and produces output
suitable for input to
.BR "lout -s" .
Thus,
.LP
.RS
.B "prg2lout -l C foo.c | lout -s | lpr"
.RE
.LP
will print the C program
.B foo.c
on a PostScript printer.  Each file will start on a new page, preceded
by its name in bold.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-llanguage
(Compulsory.)  Files are written in this programmming language.  Run
\fIprg2lout -u\fR to see the list of languages available.
.TP
.B \-pfixed
Use a fixed width font (the default for C).
.TP
.B \-pvarying
Use a varying-width italic font with non-italic bold keywords (the
default for Eiffel).
.TP
.B \-psymbol
Use a varying-width italic font with mathematical symbols and
non-italic bold keywords.
.TP
.B \-n
Do not print the file name before each source file.
.TP
.BI \-f " font"
Select a font family.
The default is 
.B \-fCourier
for
.BR \-pfixed ,
and
.B \-fTimes
for
.B \-pvarying
and
.BR \-psymbol .
.TP
.BI \-s " size"
Select a Lout font size.  The default is
.B -s9p
(meaning 9 points) for
.BR \-pfixed ,
and
.B \-s10p
for
.B \-pvarying
and
.BR \-psymbol .
These work well with 80-character-wide programs.
.TP
.BI \-v " vsize"
Select a Lout vertical inter-line gap.  The default is
.B -v1.1fx
meaning 1.1 times the font size measured from baseline to baseline.
.TP
.BI \-t " num"
Set the tab interval to
.I num
characters (default is
.BR \-t8 ).
.TP
.BI \-T " width"
Without this option,
.B prg2lout
simulates tabs with spaces.  With this option,
.B prg2lout
simulates tabs with Lout tabulation operators;
.I width
is the width of one tab interval in the final print, measured in Lout
units.  This guarantees alignment of characters following tabs even
with varying-width fonts, provided
.I width
is sufficiently large.  For example,
.B -T0.5i
produces half-inch tab intervals.
.TP
.BI \-L " number"
Attach line numbers to the program text, beginning with
.I number
or 1 if number is not given.  You may need to give the 1 anyway to
prevent .I prg2lout from taking a following file name as a number.
.TP
.BI \-S " filename"
Use
.I filename
as the setup file instead of the system default setup file.  The setup
file determines the value of all formatting options not given to
.I prg2lout
as command line arguments.
.TP
.B \-u
Print usage information on stderr, including available languages, and exit.
.TP
.B \-V
Print version information on stderr and exit.
.SS Raw Mode
There is a \(lq\&raw mode\(rq usage of
.B prg2lout
invoked by a
.B -r
flag (must be the first argument).  This converts one program file into
Lout-readable source without any heading or trailing information.
Synopsis:
.LP
.RS
.B prg2lout
.B  \-r
.BI \-i \ infile
.BI \-o \ out
.BI \-e \ err
.BI \-t \ num
.BI \-T \ width
.RE    
.LP
Users should never need this mode; it is invoked automatically
from within Lout by symbols supplied with the standard configuration
(see reference).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR lout (1),
.BR lpr (1),
.BR ghostview (1).
.SH REFERENCES
.LP
Jeffrey H. Kingston, 
.I
\(lq\&A User's Guide to the Lout Document Formatting System\(rq\c
\&, Chapter 11.
.SH AUTHOR
.LP
Jeffrey H. Kingston
